---
publishedAt: "2025-06-05T07:40:26-04:00[America/New_York]"
---
[Automation Should Be Like Iron Man, Not Ultron](https://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2841313)

Another way I've heard this put is "build mech suits, not robots."

> Iron Man's exoskeleton takes the abilities that Tony Stark has and accentuates them. Tony is a smart, strong guy. He
> can calculate power and trajectory on his own. However, by having his exoskeleton do this for him, he can focus on
> other things. Of course, if he disagrees or wants to do something the program wasn't coded to do, he can override the
> trajectory.
>
> Ultron, on the other hand, was intended to be fully autonomous. It did everything and was, basically, so complex that
> when it had to be debugged the only choice was (spoiler alert!) to destroy it.

> "Debugging is twice as hard as writing the code in the first place. Therefore, if you write the code as cleverly as
> possible, you are, by definition, not smart enough to debug it." [...] This is called the Leftover Principle. You
> automate the easy parts and what is "left over" is done by humans.  In the long run this creates a very serious
> problem. The work left over for people to do becomes, by definition, more difficult. [...] Taken to its logical
> conclusion, this paradigm results in a need to employ impossibly smart people to do impossibly difficult work. Maybe
> this is why Google's recruiters sound so painfully desperate when they call about joining their SRE team.

- Obvious question in the "junior developers completely replaced" rhetoric: if all the junior developers get replaced,
  where will the senior developers come from?  Likewise for other fields e.g. accountants.
- Absent a full Matrix / Skynet situation, there will always be, by definition, a need for skilled troubleshooters.
